II.A Definition of World Heritage
Cultural and Natural Heritage
45. Cultural and natural heritage are defined in Articles 1 and 2 of the World 
Heritage Convention.
Article 1
For the purposes of this Convention, the following shall be considered as 
“cultural heritage”;

- monuments: architectural works, works of monumental sculpture and 
painting, elements or structures of an archaeological nature, inscriptions, 
cave dwellings and combinations of features, which are of Outstanding 
Universal Value from the point of view of history, art or science;
- groups of buildings: groups of separate or connected buildings which, 
because of their architecture, their homogeneity or their place in the 
landscape, are of Outstanding Universal Value from the point of view of 
history, art or science;
-sites: works of man or the combined works of nature and of man, and areas 
including archaeological sites which are of Outstanding Universal Value 
from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological or anthropological points of view.

Article 2

For the purposes of this Convention, the following shall be considered as 
“natural heritage”:

- natural features consisting of physical and biological formations or groups 
of such formations, which are of Outstanding Universal Value from the 
aesthetic or scientific point of view;

geological and physiographical formations and precisely delineated areas 
which constitute the habitat of threatened species of animals and plants of 
Outstanding Universal Value from the point of view of science or 
conservation;

- natural sites or precisely delineated natural areas of Outstanding Universal 
Value from the point of view of science, conservation or natural beauty.

Mixed Cultural and Natural Heritage

46. Properties shall be considered as “mixed cultural and natural heritage” if they 
satisfy a part or whole of the definitions of both cultural and natural heritage 
laid out in Articles 1 and 2 of the Convention.

Cultural landscapes

Definition

47. Cultural landscapes inscribed on the World Heritage List are cultural 
properties and represent the “combined works of nature and of man” 
designated in Article 1 of the Convention. They are illustrative of the 
evolution of human society and settlement over time, under the influence of 
the physical constraints and/or opportunities presented by their natural 
environment and of successive social, economic and cultural forces, both 
external and internal.

They should be selected on the basis both of their Outstanding Universal 
Value and of their representativity in terms of a clearly defined geo-cultural 
region. They should be selected also for their capacity to illustrate the 
essential and distinct cultural elements of such regions.

The term “cultural landscape” embraces a diversity of manifestations of the 
interaction between humankind and the natural environment.
Cultural landscapes often reflect specific techniques of sustainable land use, 
considering the characteristics and limits of the natural environment they are 
established in, and may reflect a specific spiritual relationship to nature. 
Protection of cultural landscapes can contribute to current techniques of 
sustainable land use and can maintain or enhance natural values in the 
landscape. The continued existence of traditional forms of land use supports 
biological diversity in many regions of the world. The protection of 
traditional cultural landscapes is therefore helpful in maintaining biological 
diversity.

Types

47bis. Cultural landscapes fall into three main types, namely:

(i) The most easily identifiable is the clearly defined landscape designed 
and created intentionally by people. This embraces garden and 
parkland landscapes constructed for aesthetic reasons which are often 
(but not always) associated with religious or other monumental 
buildings and ensembles.

(ii) The second type is the organically evolved landscape. This results 
from an initial social, economic, administrative, and/or religious 
imperative and has developed its present form by association with and 
in response to its natural environment. 

(iii) The final type is the associative cultural landscape. The inscription of 
such landscapes on the World Heritage List is justifiable by virtue of 
the powerful religious, artistic or cultural associations of the natural 
element rather than material cultural evidence, which may be 
insignificant or even absent.

Landscapes recognized for their powerful cultural associations with the natural environment
